"At least 85% of the global population has experienced weather events made worse by climate change, according to new research published Monday in the journal Nature Climate Change. Using machine learning to analyze and map more than 100,000 studies of events that could be linked to global warming, researchers paired the analysis with a well-established data set of temperature and precipitation shifts caused by fossil fuel use and other sources of carbon emissions. These combined findings — which focused on events such as crop failures, floods and heat waves — allowed scientists to make a solid link between rising temperatures and human activities. They concluded that global warming had already affected 80% of the world's land area."

"We have a huge evidence base now that documents how climate change is affecting our societies and our ecosystems, said lead author Max Callaghan, researcher at the Mercator Research Institute on Global Commons and Climate Change in Germany. The study provides hard numbers to back up the lived experiences of people from New York City to South Sudan. ""Climate change,"" Callaghan said, ""is visible and noticeable almost everywhere in the world."" The findings come amid a major push to get countries to commit to more ambitious climate goals ahead of a United Nations summit in Glasgow next month. Research shows that existing pledges will put the planet on track to heat up about 2.7 degrees Celsius (4.9 degrees Fahrenheit) by the end of the century — a level of warming that would lead to drastic food and water shortages, deadly weather disasters and catastrophic ecosystem collapse. Some of the world's top emitters, including China and India, have yet to formally commit to a new 2030 emissions reduction target. Activists worry that an emerging energy crisis, which has raised prices and triggered blackouts, could imperil efforts to get developing economies to phase out polluting fuels. In United States, climate disasters have already caused at least 388 deaths and more than $100 billion in damage this year, according to analyses from The Washington Post and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Yet despite a pledge to halve emissions by the end of the decade, congressional Democrats are struggling to pass a pair of bills that would provide hundreds of billions of dollars for renewable energy, electric vehicles and programs that would help communities adapt to a changing climate. The contrast between the scope of climate disasters and the scale of global ambition is top of mind for hundreds of protesters who have descended on Washington this week to demand an end to fossil fuel use. The activists, many of them from Indigenous communities that have been harmed by global warming, risked arrest as they remained on the sidewalk outside the White House after police ordered them to clear the area. The new research in Nature adds to a growing body of evidence that climate change is already disrupting human life on a global scale. Scientists are increasingly able to attribute events like heat waves and hurricanes to human actions. In August, the U.N.'s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change devoted an entire chapter to extreme weather consequences of a warming world. The study's conclusion that 85% of humanity is experiencing climate impacts may sound high. But it's ""probably an underestimation,"" said Friederike Otto, a senior lecturer at the Grantham Institute for Climate Change and the Environment at Imperial College, who was not involved in the study. The study looked at average temperature and precipitation changes, rather than the most extreme impacts, for which Otto says there is an even more evidence of climate change's role. ""It is likely that nearly everyone in the world now experiences changes in extreme weather as a result of human greenhouse gas emissions,"" she said. The human toll of these events has become impossible to ignore. This summer, hundreds of people in the Pacific Northwest died after unprecedented heat baked the usually temperate region. More than a million people in Madagascar are at risk of starvation as a historic drought morphs into the a climate-induced famine. Catastrophic flooding caused New Yorkers to drown in their own homes, while flash flooding inundates refugee camps in South Sudan. In a letter released Monday, some 450 organizations representing 45 million health-care workers called attention to the way rising temperatures have increased the risk of many health issues, including breathing problems, mental illness and insect-borne diseases. One of the papers analyzed for the new study, for example, found that deaths from heart disease had risen in areas experiencing hotter conditions. ""The climate crisis is the single biggest health threat facing humanity,"" the letter said. Yet in many of the places that stand to suffer most from climate change, Callaghan and his colleagues found a deficit of research on what temperature and precipitation could mean for people's daily lives. The researchers identified fewer than 10,000 studies looking at climate change's effect on Africa, and about half that number focused on South America. By contrast, roughly 30,000 published papers examined climate impacts in North America. In poorer countries, the researchers say, roughly a quarter of people live in areas where there have been few impact studies, despite strong evidence that they are experiencing shifts in temperature and precipitation patterns. In wealthier countries, that figure stands at only 3%. ""But it indicates that we're not studying enough,"" Callaghan said, ""not that there isn't anything happening."""

"VATICAN CITY - Pope Francis on Saturday called on lawmakers worldwide to overcome ""the narrow confines"" of partisan politics to quickly reach consensus on fighting climate change."

"The pope addressed parliamentarians who were in Rome for a preparatory meeting before the U.N.'s annual climate conference, which begins in Scotland, on Oct. 31."

"Francis referred to a joint appeal he and other religious leaders signed last week that calls for governments to commit to ambitious goals at the U.N. conference, which experts consider a critical opportunity to tackle the threat of global warming."

"To meet this challenge, everyone has a role to play,'' Francis told the visiting lawmakers from many countries. That of political and government leaders is especially important, and indeed crucial."""

"This demanding change of direction will require great wisdom, foresight and concern for the common good: in a word, the fundamental virtues of good politics,'' Francis said."

"Francis said earlier he intended to participate in the U.N.'s upcoming COP26 conference, but the Vatican announced Friday that he would not attend and the Vatican delegation would be led by the secretary of state, Cardinal Pietro Parolin. No explanation was given, but the 84-year-old pope underwent intestinal surgery in July."

"The pope expressed hope Saturday that the lawmakers' efforts at the climate conference and beyond ""will be illuminated by the two important principles of responsibility and solidarity."""

"We owe this to the young, to future generations, he said."

"Caring for humanity's ""common home,"" Francis said, ""is not just a matter of discouraging and penalizing improper practices, but also, and above all, of concretely encouraging new paths to pursue"" that are better suited to climate-protection objectives and to contributing ""to the positive outcome of COP26."""

"Before his speech, Francis gave a private audience to Nancy Pelosi, speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives."

"His Holiness's leadership is a source of joy and hope for Catholics and for all people, challenging each of us to be good stewards of God's creation, to act on climate, to embrace the refugee, the immigrant and the poor, and to recognize the dignity and divinity in everyone, Pelosi said in a statement after her audience with Francis."

"She called the pontiff's 2015 encyclical exhorting people to protect the environment ""a powerful challenge to the global community to act decisively on the climate crisis with special attention to the most vulnerable communities."""

"During their encounter, Pelosi expressed gratitude ""for the immense moral clarity and urgency that His Holiness continues to bring to the climate crisis,"" the statement said."



"President Donald Trump removed climate change from the list of worldwide threats menacing the United States on Monday, a shift that underscores the long-term ramifications of the ""America first"" world view he laid out in his new National Security Strategy."

"The document depicts Russia and China as combative rivals in perpetual competition with the U.S. But it makes no mention of what scientists say are the dangers posed by a warming climate, including more extreme weather events that could spark humanitarian crises, mass migrations and conflict."

"It's a significant departure from the Obama administration, which had described climate change as an ""urgent and growing threat to our national security."" And it demonstrates how Trump, despite struggling to push his own agenda through a Republican-controlled Congress, has been able to unilaterally dismantle one of his predecessor's signature efforts."

"As far back as 2003, during George W. Bush's presidency, a report commissioned by the Defense Department said abrupt climate change threatened ""disruption and conflict,"" refugee crises, border tensions and more military conflicts."

"Trump's national security report, required annually by Congress, emphasizes that economic security is national security for the U.S. It makes clear the United States will unilaterally defend its sovereignty, even if that means risking existing agreements with other countries."

"The new document doesn't eliminate references to the environment entirely. It ""recognizes the importance of environmental stewardship"" and says that ""climate policies will continue to shape the global energy system."""

"The United States will remain a global leader in reducing traditional pollution, as well as greenhouse gases, while expanding our economy, it reads."

"But Trump, in a speech about the report, blamed past administrations for putting ""American energy under lock and key"" and said his approach ""embraces a future of American energy dominance and self-sufficiency."""

"Our nation must take advantage of our wealth in domestic resources and energy efficiency to promote competitiveness across our industries, he said."

"That thinking represents a reversal, not just from previous Democratic administrations, but from Republican as well, said Geoffrey Dabelko, director of environmental studies at Ohio University."

"Proscribing more fossil fuels rather than seeing that as a fundamental source of vulnerability that undercuts resilience ... that is definitely a departure, in some ways turning the argument on its head, he said."

"The last national strategy document, prepared by President Barack Obama in 2015, identified climate change as a national security risk alongside threats like the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and catastrophic attacks on the U.S. homeland."

"Climate change, that document warned, was contributing to ""increased natural disasters, refugee flows and conflicts over basic resources like food and water"" and was already being felt ""from the Arctic to the Midwest,"" with rising sea levels and storm surges threatening coastal regions, infrastructure and property."

"Jamil N. Jaffer, founder of the National Security Institute at George Mason University's law school, sees the broader new strategy as a shift ""that reasserts America's role in the world as a nation willing to assert its power and influence in its own interest, and as a nation ready and willing to engage in competition - and win-- in areas ranging from economics to diplomacy."""

"But Rosina Bierbaum, a University of Michigan environmental policy scientist, said, ""Not including climate change in a document about security threats is putting our head in the sand."""

"Climate change is ""absolutely a security threat,"" posing risks to U.S. coastal infrastructure, expanding the ranges of pests and pathogens, and fueling more powerful storms and wildfires, she said. Around the world, the changing climate threatens food and drinking water shortages that will boost mass migration and heighten international tension, said Bierbaum, a former associate director of the White House Office of Science and Technology during the Clinton administration who helped write the initial congressionally mandated national climate assessment."

"Michael Oppenheimer, a climate scientist at Princeton University, said, ""There's a big element of cutting off our nose to spite our face just because the administration doesn't like the words 'climate change.'"""

"Since taking office, Trump has worked to roll back regulations on planet-warming carbon emissions. He announced his intention to withdraw from what he described as ""the very expensive and unfair"" Paris climate agreement signed by nearly 200 nations, approved the Keystone XL pipeline, and worked to scrap Obama-era initiatives meant to reduce carbon emissions from coal-fired power plants, among a long list of measures."

"Trump has personally expressed skepticism about the reality of climate change, describing it on Twitter as an ""expensive hoax"" that was ""created by and for the Chinese"" to hurt U.S. manufacturing."

"However, members of the Trump administration, including Defense Secretary James Mattis, have made clear they believe a changing climate should be taken into account by the U.S. military."

"Trump himself signed a defense spending bill this month that orders the Pentagon to assess the ""vulnerabilities to military installations and combatant commander requirements resulting from climate change over the next 20 years."""

"Trump is not just ignoring science and public opinion about the dangers of the climate crisis, he's ignoring American generals and the Pentagon about what it takes to keep our military and our country safe, Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club, said in a statement."

"But David Titley, a retired rear admiral and the director of the Center for Solutions to Weather and Climate Risk at Penn State, said he was pleased to see at least some reference to greenhouse gases and pollution in the document, although he said it was unlikely to have much impact on day-to-day actions by the Department of Defense."

"The facts on the ground are the earth is continuing to heat up. The sea level continues to rise. So whether or not this administration talks about climate risk, the DoD is going to have to deal with it, he said."

"WASHINGTON - The Biden administration is taking steps to address the economic risks from climate change, issuing a 40-page report Friday on government-wide plans to protect the financial, insurance and housing markets and the savings of American families."

"The report lays out steps that could potentially alter the mortgage process, stock market disclosures, retirement plans, federal procurement and government budgeting."

"It's a follow-up to a May executive order by President Joe Biden that essentially calls on the government to analyze how the world's largest economy could be affected by extreme heat, flooding, storms, wildfires and the broader adjustments needed to address climate change."

"If this year has shown us anything, it's that climate change poses an ongoing urgent and systemic risk to our economy and to the lives and livelihoods of everyday Americans, and we must act now, Gina McCarthy, the White House national climate adviser, told reporters."

"The report is an effort to showcase to the world how serious the U.S. government is about tackling climate change ahead of the United Nations Climate Change Conference running from Oct. 31 to Nov. 12 in Glasgow, Scotland."

Among the steps outlined is the government's Financial Stability Oversight Council developing the tools to identify and lessen climate-related risks to the economy. The Treasury Department plans to address the risks to the insurance sector and availability of coverage. The Securities and Exchange Commission is looking at mandatory disclosure rules about the opportunities and risks generated by climate change.

The Labor Department on Wednesday proposed a rule for investment managers to factor environmental decisions into the choices made for pensions and retirement savings. The Office of Management and Budget announced the government will begin the process of asking federal agencies to consider greenhouse gas emissions from the companies providing supplies. Biden's budget proposal for fiscal 2023 will feature an assessment of climate risks.

"Federal agencies involved in lending and mortgages for homes are looking for the impact on the housing market, with the Department of Housing and Urban Development and its partners developing disclosures for homebuyers and flood and climate-related risks. The Department of Veterans Affairs will also look at climate risks for its home lending program."

"The Federal Emergency Management Agency is updating the standards for its National Flood Insurance Program, potentially revising guidelines that go back to 1976."

"We now do recognize that climate change is a systemic risk, McCarthy said. ""We have to look fundamentally at the way the federal government does its job and how we look at the finance system and its stability."""


"A Kansas State University distinguished professor and Nobel Prize recipient says ""time is running out"" for people to take action to mitigate the effects of climate change."

"Chuck Rice, university distinguished professor of agronomy, said ""we will have to get our act together more quickly"" if humanity is to adapt to the increasingly extreme weather events being observed because of a changing climate. Rice, who specializes in soil microbiology and climate interactions, is the co-winner of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize for his work with the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)."

"On Aug. 9, the IPCC released its sixth report on climate change which stated that humans are ""unequivocally"" to blame for climate disruptions. It also painted a dire picture of how climate change is altering the natural world and what those alterations might look like. The report drew from more than 14,000 scientific studies and is currently considered the most comprehensive view of climate change effects yet to come."

"The report indicates a likely increase in drought and fire weather conditions across the central and western portions of North America, as well as a projected increase in extreme precipitation which could lead to more flooding, especially in low-lying areas in the U.S."

"Rice said Kansas will see warmer winters and especially warmer nighttime temperatures, which means plants and agricultural crops will be more at risk from pests and diseases that would normally be killed off by freezes."

"Those pests and diseases will survive and become more of a problem, Rice said. ""This will also impact cities — Manhattan might have more pests living in trees, for example."""

"Rice said certain invasive pests, such as the pine bark beetle that is blamed for decimating forests in Colorado and other western states, will have a longer life cycle because of warmer winter temperatures."

He said the increase in pesky insects and plant diseases will also impact local gardens and agricultural operations.

"A risk to both rural and urban areas Rice noted was an increase in extreme weather events. He said places like Manhattan could see more intense rainstorms with periods of drought in between, which would lead to localized flooding."

"We've noticed this is happening already, and with climate change it will be accentuated, Rice said."

"Rice cited the flood event in Manhattan in 2018, where the area saw 30% less precipitation than usual up until Labor Day that year."

"Then on Labor Day, within four hours we got 8 to 12 inches of rain, which caused major flooding on the west side of the city, Rice said."

"Longer periods of drought pockmarked by intense rainstorms means flooding in towns and cities, but in rural areas Rice said it means more soil erosion and loss of crops. He said humans might be able to deal with just an increase in global temperatures, but ""from an infrastructure perspective"" dealing with extreme weather fluctuations is ""much harder."""

"While weather is what the atmosphere is producing daily, climate is the span of atmospheric changes over a long period of time. According to the IPCC report, since 1970 global temperatures have increased faster than in any other 50-year period in the last 2,000 years."

"Climate change has been gradual, so people don't really notice it, Rice said. ""It's not something they see tomorrow or whatever."""

"State climatologist Mary Knapp said just because we may not see the same type of extreme weather events as in other locations, ""that doesn't mean it's not happening"" in Kansas."

"Rice said a warming planet may not lead to an increased number of weather hazards like tornadoes and hurricanes, but it may lead to more intense severe weather events when they do occur."

"We've seen that in the last couple of years, both on the coasts and to some extent in the Plains states, Rice said."

"Rice said wildfires also will become more of a problem for Kansas in the future. Dryer conditions in late winter and early spring means dead vegetation cannot rebound as quickly, which increases the fuel for fires to thrive. Rice said there's ""definitely evidence"" from the last several years that Kansas will see more wildfires."

Knapp said it's within the realm of possibility that current generations could see another Dust Bowl much like the disaster which impacted the central U.S. in the 1930s.

"I've been saying that for years, Knapp said. ""The thought is, with modern agricultural and conservation techniques, that we would preclude the scenario that plagued the Dust Bowl, but there are other factors that can remove vegetation."""

"Without vegetation, Knapp said soil becomes loose and is more easily blown away by prairie winds. Decomposed plants make good fodder for wildfires, which would clear the landscape and make it easier for a Dust Bowl-type of prolonged disaster to occur."

"Is it as likely as it was back in the 1930s? We're doing everything we can to prevent that, but it's not beyond the realm of possibility for that to happen, Knapp said."

"Rice said the situation is not totally hopeless. Governments and corporations worldwide are implementing more environmentally conscious practices into their routines to reduce carbon emissions. Every major automotive manufacturer on the planet is adding electric cars to their lineups, with the goal of reducing global vehicular carbon emissions to zero by 2050."

"In Kansas, Rice said increased usage of solar and wind energy will help wean people off using coal to create electricity, and those industries in turn will create more jobs. In the Kansas City metropolitan area, trees are being planted to create shade and remove what are called heat islands, or areas in urban settings where heat is captured and cannot dissipate. He said increasing access to public transportation and adding more charging stations for electric cars will help short and long-term."

"A lot of climate skeptics would say, 'What's the cost of reducing carbon emissions?' But the reverse would be 'What's the cost of not doing something?' Rice said. ""What's the cost associated with disasters? A lot of private sector industries... they see the handwriting on the wall."""

Knapp said there are small things people can do to help reduce their impact on the planet.

"It can be as simple as turning off lights when you're not home or leaving the thermostat a little bit warmer than you normally would, Knapp said. ""Maybe walking rather than driving when it's appropriate. Individual energy savings on our own aren't going to solve our problems, but it's a good start."""




"Three scientists won the Nobel Prize in physics Tuesday for work that found order in seeming disorder, helping to explain and predict complex forces of nature, including expanding our understanding of climate change. Syukuro Manabe, originally from Japan, and Klaus Hasselmann of Germany were cited for their work in developing forecast models of Earth's climate and ""reliably predicting global warming."" The second half of the prize went to Giorgio Parisi of Italy for explaining disorder in physical systems, ranging from those as small as the insides of atoms to the planet-sized."

"Hasselmann told The Associated Press that he ""would rather have no global warming and no Nobel Prize.'' Manabe said that figuring out the physics behind climate change was ""1,000 times"" easier than getting the world to do something about it. He said the intricacies of policy and society are far harder to fathom than the complexities of carbon dioxide interacting with the atmosphere, which then changes conditions in the ocean and on the land, which then alters the air again in a constant cycle. He called climate change ""a major crisis."" The prize comes less than four weeks before the start of high-level climate negotiations in Glasgow, Scotland, where world leaders will be asked to ramp up their commitments to curb global warming. The Nobel-winning scientists used their moment in the limelight to urge action. ""It's very urgent that we take very strong decisions and move at a very strong pace"" in tackling global warming, Parisi said. He made the appeal even though his share of the prize was for work in a different area of physics. All three scientists work on what are known as ""complex systems,"" of which climate is just one example. But the prize went to two fields of study that are opposite in many ways, though they share the goal of making sense of what seems random and chaotic so that it can be predicted. Parisi's research largely centers around subatomic particles, predicting how they move in seemingly chaotic ways and why, and is somewhat esoteric, while the work by Manabe and Hasselmann is about large-scale global forces that shape our daily lives. The judges said Manabe, 90, and Hasselmann, 89, ""laid the foundation of our knowledge of the Earth's climate and how human actions influence it."" Starting in the 1960s, Manabe, now based at Princeton University, created the first climate models that forecast what would happen as carbon dioxide built up. Manabe is such a pioneer that other climate scientists called his 1967 paper with the late Richard Wetherald ""the most influential climate paper ever,"" said NASA chief climate modeler Gavin Schmidt."



"Come visit the Maldives, its president entreated the world at this year's United Nations General Assembly, moments before switching to an impassioned plea for help combating climate change. The adjacent appeals illustrated a central dilemma for many small island developing states: their livelihoods, or their lives?"

"The United Nations recognizes 38 member states, scattered across the world's waters, as small island developing states grouped together because they face ""unique social, economic and environmental challenges."""

"This bloc is particularly vulnerable to climate change. This bloc is also particularly dependent on tourism - a significant driver of climate change, accountable for 8% of global carbon dioxide emissions alone, according to sustainable tourism expert Stefan Gössling - and an industry devastated by the ongoing coronavirus pandemic."

"The predicament these islands find themselves in is essentially recursive: Attract tourism for economic survival, which in turn contributes to climate change, which in turn bleaches the colorful reefs and destroys the pristine beaches that attract tourists. As is, by the end of the century, these low-lying islands could drown entirely."

"The difference between 1.5 degrees and 2 degrees is a death sentence for the Maldives, President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih told the U.N. General Assembly last week."

The annual summit is an opportunity for each of the international body's 193 members to step into the spotlight on the world stage. But the Maldives - perhaps best known globally as an Indian Ocean playground for moneyed honeymooners and Bollywood celebrities - had a particularly high-profile platform this year. Its foreign minister is serving as the General Assembly's president and Solih was speaking third overall - just after U.S. President Joe Biden.

"But the climate change appeals are nothing new, made year after year as these islands are pummeled by storms and the seas rise like a ""slow-moving killer,"" as Colgate University's April Baptiste puts it."

"Baptiste, a professor of environmental studies as well as Africana and Latin American studies, researches environmental justice in the Caribbean region. She says the island states' appeals had gone ignored for years because they were essentially seen as ""dispensable."" With little land, political power and financial capital, it was easy to overlook their plight. These are also islands with a history of exploitation that dates back centuries and states whose full-time residents - not tourists - are primarily Black and brown."

"You have that layer of race, racism, marginality to take into consideration, she said. ""I absolutely believe that's at the heart of the conversation as to why small island developing states are not taken seriously."""

People and governments have taken matters into their own hands over recent years.

"One man from the island nation of Kiribati sought refugee status in New Zealand on the basis that climate change posed an existential threat to his homeland, though he was eventually deported. This past week, Vanuatu announced it would seek to bring climate change before the International Court of Justice. Although largely symbolic - any ruling would not be legally binding - the move, as intended by the government, seeks to clarify international law."

"Last month, a group of Pacific island nations - contending with encroaching saltwater that destroys crops and pollutes freshwater supplies - took the step of declaring their traditional sea boundaries would remain intact, even if their coastlines shrank beneath the waves."

"Gössling, a professor at Sweden's Linnaeus University School of Business and Economics, and Daniel Scott, a geography and environmental management professor at Canada's University of Waterloo, are two creators of the Climate Change Vulnerability Index for Tourism. With the aim of bringing the issue to policymakers' attention, they identified the countries with tourism economies most at risk from climate change. The small island developing states made up a substantial portion of the list."

"The Maldives identified this years ago and they pointed out: 'We're going to continue our tourism development, because that's the only way we can make money in the next couple decades before our islands are lost,' Scott said."

"For the small island developing states, this central climate change tension between lives and livelihood is mirrored in their response to the coronavirus pandemic. To prevent the virus' spread and save lives, they closed their borders, and their tourism-focused economies were accordingly ravaged over the past 18 months."

"Mauritius isn't wholly dependent on tourism, but that sector does make up a significant amount of its foreign revenue, the permanent representative to the United Nations for the tiny Indian Ocean island east of Madagascar says. Its borders fully reopen in October, and Jagdish Koonjul said Mauritius hopes to attract 650,000 tourists between then and next summer."

"Mauritius, Koonjul said, is ""very lucky"" compared to others in the bloc because of its economic diversification, relatively high land and coral reef that prevents erosion."

"But it's not safe from climate change. Mauritius and other small island developing states are looking to the bigger, more industrialized countries to buy into an ambitious commitment at the upcoming United Nations climate conference in Glasgow."

"We miss this train now, and we are doomed, Koonjul said."


"In this age of climate change, we naturally train our attention on all the fossil fuels being combusted for human use - but scientists have long known that what's happening is also all about the land."

"Just as buried fossil fuels are filled with carbon from ancient plant and animal life, so too are living trees and vegetation on Earth's surface today. Razing forests or plowing grasslands puts carbon in the atmosphere just like burning fossil fuels does."

"Now, new research provides a surprisingly large estimate of just how consequential our treatment of land surfaces and vegetation has been on the planet and its atmosphere. If true, it's a finding that could shape not only our response to climate change, but our understanding of ourselves as agents of planetary transformation."

"We have forgotten half of the story up to now, said Karl-Heinz Erb, the lead study author and a researcher with the Institute of Social Ecology in Austria."

"Using a series of detailed maps, derived from satellite information and other types of ecological measurements, Erb and his colleagues estimated how much carbon is contained in Earth's current vegetation. The number is massive: 450 billion tons of carbon, which, if it were to somehow arrive in the atmosphere as carbon dioxide, would amount to over a trillion tons of the gas. (The mass is greater due to the addition of oxygen molecules.)"

"But the study also presented an even larger and perhaps more consequential number: 916 billion tons. That's the amount of carbon, the research calculated, that could reside in the world's vegetation - so not in the atmosphere - if humans somehow entirely ceased all uses of land and allowed it to return to its natural state. The inference is that current human use of land is responsible for roughly halving the potential storage of carbon."

"The research was published in the journal Nature by Erb and 12 colleagues from institutions in Austria, Germany, Portugal, Sweden and the Netherlands."

The impact calculation is so large because humans have done far more than just bring about deforestation.

"Half of this effect, half of this halving, is already well described, he said. ""This is the deforestation signal. But the other half, in most studies, is completely missing."""

"The study found that there are two far less recognized components of how humans have subtracted from Earth's potential vegetation - and that in combination they are just as substantial as deforestation. Those are large-scale grazing and other uses of grasslands, as well as forest ""management."""

"With the latter, many trees and other types of vegetation are subtracted from forests, often the larger and older trees due to logging, but the forests don't disappear. They're just highly thinned out."

"This effect is quite massive, more massive than we expected actually, Erb said."

"The finding has implications for the human past, present and future."

"First, the past: It suggests, in line with the thesis of University of Virginia professor William Ruddiman, that humans have been changing the surface of the planet and putting greenhouse gases in the atmosphere through land use for millennia."

"Our finding is in line with the statement that the impact of humans on the climate was quite considerable also before the industrial times, Erb said."

"However, he added, those past changes were unlikely to account for 450 gigatons or so of lost carbon. That's not only because deforestation and other land use changes have continued since the industrial revolution, but also because the research suggests that Earth's potential vegetation was somewhat lower in the past than it is in the present, thanks to changes in the climate."

"As for the present: The research means so-called degraded land - not fully deforested but not ""natural"" or whole - is a phenomenon to be reckoned with."

"It suggests that the amount of carbon released to the atmosphere from land use is approximately equal to the amount still retained, said Tom Lovejoy, an ecologist at George Mason University who was not involved in the work. ""That means the restoration agenda is even more important than previously thought and highlights the enormous amount of degraded land in the world."""

And then there's the future. The research simultaneously suggests that restoring land could do a lot to fight climate change but also that the highly popular idea of using biomass to withdraw carbon dioxide from the air may need some rethinking.


"If you're like us, when the tornado warnings go out across southern Illinois, do you wonder: Is this one more symptom of climate change? That's impossible to answer with any precision. We have had tornadoes and stormy weeks before."

"It's hard to pinpoint what drives a single weather event. But what is clear is that extreme weather — the record heat waves, wildfires and unprecedented flooding that have ravaged the globe this summer — is a hallmark of this undeniable change. Climate change is not some distant threat; it is here. And the impact of it is only going to get worse. It's going to get worse even if we do something about it. All we're left with now is to minimize how much worse it gets. If we do nothing or next to nothing, if we continue to kid ourselves that it's just part of the natural ebb and flow of the planet's weather, well, then it will become a catastrophe. If we all have not been alarmed by the extreme weather so far in 2021, we should be by the report from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. It warns that world leaders must act immediately to reduce human reliance on fossil fuels or risk significant growth of extreme weather events. But this is not just a matter for world leaders and politicians. It is an existential challenge that calls on all of us to do our parts. Some responses will be easy. Some will be hard. All must be done. We must reduce the flow of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, and we must make wise choices in how we adapt to the climate change that already has been set in motion. The U.N. panel said scientists are observing irrefutable climate changes in every region of the planet. ""Many of the changes observed in the climate are unprecedented in thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of years, and some of the changes already set in motion, such as continued sea level rise, are irreversible over hundreds to thousands of years,"" they said. Left unchecked, these changes will affect virtually everything about human life as well as the lives of other animals who share the planet with us: our water and food supplies, sea levels, where and how we live, our health, our economies, virtually everything. ""We just barely have the time,"" says Illinois congressman Sean Casten. ""Our moment is right now to do what's necessary."" We can pretend no longer."


"Your children may have questions about the changing climate. Many are hearing about or experiencing climate-change-fueled disasters such as wildfires and severe storms. Climate change affects everyone, but it impacts kids the most. Children are especially vulnerable to environmental health harms because they are still growing and have higher exposure to air, food and water based on weight."

"While the climate crisis can feel like an overwhelming topic, there are healthy ways to talk with kids about it. We can communicate in a way that is honest, hopeful, developmentally appropriate, and action oriented. By helping kids understand the issue of climate change and how it affects their health and futures, we empower them to make a difference. For toddlers and children under 5, it's a perfect time to introduce them the joys of nature. Parents may take walks to show how weather affects nature. Talk about how weather makes the seasons. You can point out bird nests, for example, and talk about how weather influences when and where birds make their nests. Talk about other wild animals and discuss how they all have homes that need protecting. Young children also enjoy gardening. Pick out fruit, vegetable or flower seeds to plant in your garden, or herbs to plant in kitchen boxes. Young children can help take care of plants, and get excited seeing something grow from nothing. Talk about how your child needs air to breathe and so do plants and animals. When pollutants get in the air, that affects their health. Point out local effects of climate change depending on your location. Some areas may be more prone to wildfires, hurricanes and floods, while others may experience longer and more intense heat waves or an increase in illness from mosquitoes and ticks. As children grow older, parents may begin explaining concepts behind climate change in simple scientific terms. Ask children what they know and fill in blanks or research it together. NASA has online resources to help parents go through each aspect of climate change. Families may also discuss how personal choices can affect the environment and show respect for nature. Calculate your family's carbon footprint together and ask them how they suggest lowering it. Examples might include turning lights off after leaving the room, biking or walking or taking public transit or carpooling when possible. Families may choose to eat a more plant-based diet. Explain how people — including kids — can be powerful forces in protecting the environment. Point out that choices we make can help make our planet, and people, healthier. Because teens are more aware of how issues may influence all aspects of their lives, you can discuss how climate change affects our economy and society. This can spark scientific curiosity and introduce the idea of civic responsibility. Pick a recent or ongoing event and discuss how climate change might have contributed to the event and its economic effects. For example, families can talk with their teen about how climate change is causing longer and more severe wildfires in California, resulting in the loss of homes and businesses. Discuss how it is also causing air pollution that forces people indoors. Consider the mental health effects all of this can have on families. Families might also explore how climate change doesn't affect everyone equally, and the ways some communities experience more health risks. Discuss how everyone should have an equal opportunity to clean air and water. Encourage your teen to come up with solutions and creative ways to express their ideas. They might use a science class presentation or a school, Scouts, 4-H or other project to educate peers about the need for climate change solutions. They could also form a club at school and brainstorm how to help the local community, write for a local or state newspaper on why teens care about the climate or join a national youth advocacy organization. Work together to make changes at home, incorporating your teen's ideas. Participate in advocacy as a family and pace your discussions to help prevent stress and anxiety. When disasters such as wildfires and hurricanes happen, be sure to limit your child's media use to cut down on the amount of distressing footage they see and hear on the news. Take nature breaks when possible. When you talk with your child, stay hopeful and focused on solutions. We have tools to take climate action right now, remind them, and these can have immediate benefits for our health. Even if the climate crisis is accelerating, emphasize that together we can clean up our air and water and reduce our carbon footprint. Parents are role models and can think about ways to advocate for a healthier environment for children. They can ask the school district to incorporate a climate curriculum, share news of climate advocacy work and reach out to local, state and federal legislators to encourage climate action. Kids are the next generation of innovators and thinkers. Youth leadership is already making a huge difference. If we nurture a love for the environment early, children may just come up with the best solutions. Don't be surprised if they teach you something, too, along the way. "


"ooking down a hillside dotted with large stumps and nearly devoid of trees, a pair of retired U.S. Forest Service employees lamented logging policies they helped craft to deal with two harbingers of climate change -- pine beetles and wildfires."

"Timber production dramatically ramped up two decades ago in the Black Hills National Forest along the South Dakota-Wyoming border, as beetles ravaged huge expanses of forest and worries grew over wildfires."

"The beetles left, but the loggers haven't - and they're now felling trees at twice the rate government scientists say is sustainable. That means the Black Hills forests are shrinking, with fewer and smaller trees."

"Timber sales from federal forests nationwide more than doubled over the past 20 years, according to government data. In Washington, D.C., Republicans and Democrats alike have pushed more aggressive thinning of stands to reduce vegetation that fuels wildfires."

"But critics of federal forest management say that in their fervor to do something about climate change, officials are allowing the removal of too many older trees that can actually better withstand fire."

"In the Black Hills, stands of century-old ponderosa pines were thinned over the past two decades, then thinned again. In some areas, most of the remaining older and larger trees are being cut, leaving hillsides almost bare."

"Eventually you're not going to have any big trees on the whole forest, said Dave Mertz, who worked as a government natural resources officer overseeing Black Hills logging until retiring in 2017. ""The timber industry is pulling the strings now. The Forest Service has lost its way."""

"Across the western U.S., more trees have been dying as climate change dramatically alters the landscape and leaves forests more susceptible. Wildfires, insects and disease are the top killers, researchers say."

"A sweeping government review of forest health surveys since 1993 found that the rate of trees dying increased this century and outpaced new growth in all eight states examined - Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming. Timber harvested from Forest Service lands over the past two decades also increased."

"In the Black Hills, those two trends have collided. With more trees being logged and even more killed by beetles and fires in recent years, government scientists say the forest can't grow fast enough to keep up."

The timber industry and allies in Congress are pushing back against that conclusion. Timber company representatives predict dire economic consequences if forest managers sharply reduce harvest levels. And they say wildfires and beetle outbreaks would get worse.

"One of the region's seven mills closed in March, eliminating 120 jobs in Hill City, South Dakota. Owner Neiman Enterprises said a recent slowdown in timber sales meant it wouldn't have enough logs."

"These companies aren't tech startups. They are multi-generational family companies that want to be there for the long term, said Ben Wudtke, director of the Black Hills Forest Resource Association of saw mills and logging companies."

"To counter growing havoc from western wildfires, Biden's administration wants to double the forest acreage thinned or treated with prescribed burns to 6 million acres annually - bigger than New Hampshire."

One method to reduce fire risk is to remove dense stands of small trees and thick underbrush that accumulated for decades as wildfires - a natural part of the landscape - were suppressed.

"It's expensive, labor-intensive work, and there's little market value in small trees. When sworn in this summer, Forest Service Chief Randy Moore said combating climate change will require making it worthwhile to harvest smaller trees, such as using the vegetation as biomass to generate electricity."

"It doesn't pay for itself, and we don't have markets that seem to be increasing quickly enough, he said."

"The service's former deputy chief, Jim Furnish, criticized the agency as too focused on timber production and too slow to react to climate change, to the detriment of the forest."

"There are signs of change under President Joe Biden, including the administration's move last month to end large-scale commercial logging of old-growth trees in Alaska's Tongass National Forest."

"But other projects that include old-growth removal are pending, including in Montana's Kootenai National Forest along the Canada border, the Kaibab National Forest just north of the Grand Canyon in Arizona and Idaho's Nez Perce-Clearwater National Forest."

"The Forest Service's approach to date has been to attack this as a management problem: 'We need to cut more trees,' Furnish told The Associated Press. ""You can't cut your way out of this problem."""

"Moore, the agency's chief, acknowledged the warming planet was forcing changes, but said he hoped to find a ""sweet spot"" between the environment and industry - while removing enough vegetation to reduce wildfire risk. In the Black Hills, officials said they would consider the latest science alongside economic impacts as they seek to make logging sustainable."

"We need the industry to help us, Moore said, referring to climate change. ""It's not really about timber sales or cutting large trees."""


"Looking down a hillside dotted with large stumps and nearly devoid of trees, a pair of retired U.S. Forest Service employees lamented logging policies they helped craft to deal with two harbingers of climate change -- pine beetles and wildfires."

"Timber production dramatically ramped up two decades ago in the Black Hills National Forest along the South Dakota-Wyoming border, as beetles ravaged huge expanses of forest and worries grew over wildfires."

"The beetles left, but the loggers haven't - and they're now felling trees at twice the rate government scientists say is sustainable. That means the Black Hills forests are shrinking, with fewer and smaller trees."

"Timber sales from federal forests nationwide more than doubled over the past 20 years, according to government data. In Washington, D.C., Republicans and Democrats alike have pushed more aggressive thinning of stands to reduce vegetation that fuels wildfires."

"But critics of federal forest management say that in their fervor to do something about climate change, officials are allowing the removal of too many older trees that can actually better withstand fire."

"In the Black Hills, stands of century-old ponderosa pines were thinned over the past two decades, then thinned again. In some areas, most of the remaining older and larger trees are being cut, leaving hillsides almost bare."

"Eventually you're not going to have any big trees on the whole forest, said Dave Mertz, who worked as a government natural resources officer overseeing Black Hills logging until retiring in 2017. ""The timber industry is pulling the strings now. The Forest Service has lost its way."""

"Across the western U.S., more trees have been dying as climate change dramatically alters the landscape and leaves forests more susceptible. Wildfires, insects and disease are the top killers, researchers say."

"A sweeping government review of forest health surveys since 1993 found that the rate of trees dying increased this century and outpaced new growth in all eight states examined - Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming. Timber harvested from Forest Service lands over the past two decades also increased."

"In the Black Hills, those two trends have collided. With more trees being logged and even more killed by beetles and fires in recent years, government scientists say the forest can't grow fast enough to keep up."

The timber industry and allies in Congress are pushing back against that conclusion. Timber company representatives predict dire economic consequences if forest managers sharply reduce harvest levels. And they say wildfires and beetle outbreaks would get worse.

"One of the region's seven mills closed in March, eliminating 120 jobs in Hill City, South Dakota. Owner Neiman Enterprises said a recent slowdown in timber sales meant it wouldn't have enough logs."

"These companies aren't tech startups. They are multi-generational family companies that want to be there for the long term, said Ben Wudtke, director of the Black Hills Forest Resource Association of saw mills and logging companies."

"To counter growing havoc from western wildfires, Biden's administration wants to double the forest acreage thinned or treated with prescribed burns to 6 million acres annually - bigger than New Hampshire."

One method to reduce fire risk is to remove dense stands of small trees and thick underbrush that accumulated for decades as wildfires - a natural part of the landscape - were suppressed.

"It's expensive, labor-intensive work, and there's little market value in small trees. When sworn in this summer, Forest Service Chief Randy Moore said combating climate change will require making it worthwhile to harvest smaller trees, such as using the vegetation as biomass to generate electricity."

"It doesn't pay for itself, and we don't have markets that seem to be increasing quickly enough, he said."

"The service's former deputy chief, Jim Furnish, criticized the agency as too focused on timber production and too slow to react to climate change, to the detriment of the forest. There are signs of change under President Joe Biden, including the administration's move last month to end large-scale commercial logging of old-growth trees in Alaska's Tongass National Forest. But other projects that include old-growth removal are pending, including in Montana's Kootenai National Forest along the Canada border, the Kaibab National Forest just north of the Grand Canyon in Arizona and Idaho's Nez Perce-Clearwater National Forest. ""The Forest Service's approach to date has been to attack this as a management problem: 'We need to cut more trees,'"" Furnish told The Associated Press. ""You can't cut your way out of this problem."" Moore, the agency's chief, acknowledged the warming planet was forcing changes, but said he hoped to find a ""sweet spot"" between the environment and industry - while removing enough vegetation to reduce wildfire risk. In the Black Hills, officials said they would consider the latest science alongside economic impacts as they seek to make logging sustainable. We need the industry to help us,"" Moore said, referring to climate change. ""It's not really about timber sales or cutting large trees."""